The United States is one of just two countries that allow pharmaceutical firms to freely advertise their products directly to consumers. (The other is New Zealand.) So if you ever watch TV in the U.S., you have likely seen many ads for prescription drugs. But advertising doesn’t guarantee success. The research and development of these drugs is very expensive, and most of them never earn back their investment. The pharmaceutical industry, therefore, relies on the occasional blockbuster drug, a blockbuster defined as doing more than $1 billion a year in sales. If I asked you to name a blockbuster drug from the past, you might say Lipitor, a statin originally from Parke-Davis; or Humira, an anti-inflammatory now sold by AbbVie. And can you name a current blockbuster? The first drug that comes to mind might be this one:

    AD: Oh-oh-oh, Ozempic.

If you watch even a tiny bit of TV, you have probably seen an ad for Ozempic. Their jingle is sung to the tune of the 1974 pop hit “Magic,” by a band called Pilot, which had exactly one U.S. hit. Ozempic, which is sold by the Danish multinational Novo Nordisk, is not a one-hit wonder. It is one of a group of drugs known as GLP-1s, and many Americans would agree that they are magic. GLP stands for “glucagon-like peptide,” which is a hormone produced in the human gut, and these drugs mimic the activity of that hormone. Ozempic was developed to treat Type 2 diabetes, which used to be called adult-onset diabetes, to distinguish it from the more serious Type 1 diabetes, which most often occurs in young people. But those lines have blurred, as many more people around the world, including a lot of young people, are now getting Type 2 diabetes. Diabetes is a condition whereby the pancreas can’t produce enough insulin to modulate your level of glucose, or blood sugar. Over the long term, high blood sugar can lead to all kinds of problems. So, any drug that could help the body produce more insulin would be a blockbuster.
Enter Ozempic. But wait — there’s more. Ozempic and other GLP-1s don’t just lower blood sugar; they also help patients lose weight, primarily by slowing digestion and decreasing appetite. This secondary discovery — weight loss — was a big deal, especially in the U.S., where more than 40 percent of the adult population is obese. Even though researchers don’t know much about the long-term effects of GLPs — whether they remain effective over time, whether they have serious side effects — the take-up has been enthusiastic. Ozempic and Wegovy, another GLP drug made by Novo Nordisk, and which is authorized to treat obesity — will do a combined $65 billion in global sales this year. Novo Nordisk is now worth more than the G.D.P. of Denmark. And Novo Nordisk isn’t the only company making blockbuster GLPs. Another big one is Mounjaro, which was brought to market in 2022 by the American pharmaceutical firm Eli Lilly; works by mimicking two digestive proteins, GLP-1 and GIP. Most of these new drugs are, for now, injectables — although that will change, and some are already in pill form. And these drugs aren’t cheap — at least not yet. In the U.S., they can cost more than $1,000 a month and, as we’ll hear today, insurance coverage varies widely. Still, more than 15 million Americans are already using these drugs. So, is the magic real — or maybe too good to be true?

The Americans go predominantly to MIT or Harvard. I was surprised other top US universities (Stanford, Yale, Princeton etc) were almost non-existent, but maybe the focus on well roundedness at other universities works against their recruitment of these medallists?

While a majority of Chinese medallists stay in China, a large minority go to MIT, and none go to Harvard (burn). In fact I noticed while curating the dataset that a lot of students start at Peking University and then transfer out to MIT after two years. This is corroborated from reading the bio of Xianyi Zeng. It seems like all IMO gold medallists get automatic entry to Peking but plenty of them transfer out after a couple of years.


I am vaguely interested in math, but I had never heard of this before even though, per Wikipedia, it is “widely seen as the single biggest project in modern mathematical research”.